---
title: "Applying to the NSF Graduate Fellowship 2025"
author: "Ahad Jawaid"
layout: post
date: "2024-11-03"

thumbnail: assets/img/posts/nsf-grfp/nsf-logo.png
description: This post provides an overview of the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) and shares key takeaways from my recent experience applying. It includes statistics on recipients, highlights from the official solicitation, and details about the review rubric. Additionally, I discuss important lessons learned and offer insights into preparing a competitive application.
categories: [Research, Graduate School, Fellowships]~
---

# Applying to NSF Graduate Fellowship 2025

The National Science Foundation (NSF) awards $159,000 to up to 2,300 Graduate Research Fellowships (GRFP) every year. In 2024, the NSF awarded fellowships to 14.44% of applicants [1]. This program is intended for U.S. citizens.

I recently completed my application for the NSF GRFP and wanted to share the stuff I found important from the process, from understanding the requirements to crafting a research proposal. I applied under the Computer Science - Robotics topic for the 2025 cycle.

This post covers:
- Statistics for the Program
- NSF Fellowship Solicitation
- Review Rubric
- Discussions

This post is part of a mini blog series, including:
1. Applying to NSF Graduate Fellowship 2024 (This post)
2. Writing a Research Proposal
3. Writing a Personal Statement
4. Asking for Letters of Recommendation


### Statistics for the Program

After applying, I analyzed the 2024 awardee statistics. Here’s a breakdown:

**Distribution of recipient majors:**

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/posts/nsf-grfp/nsf_grfp_major_distribution.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

**Top 35 fields accepted in the NSF GRFP:**

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/posts/nsf-grfp/nsf-grfp-top-35-subfields.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

**Top computer science subfields accepted:**

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/posts/nsf-grfp/nsf-grfp-cs-subfields.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

**Top 20 institutions by number of recipients:**

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/posts/nsf-grfp/nsf-grfp-top-20-schools.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

These statistics were derived from public NSF data, accessible [here](https://www.research.gov/grfp/AwardeeList.do?method=loadAwardeeList) [2].

## NSF Fellowship Solicitation

A crucial resource for applying is the program’s [solicitation](https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/grfp-nsf-graduate-research-fellowship-program/nsf24-591/solicitation) [3]. It outlines all essential information about the program, application guidelines, and goals.

### Program Goals

According to the solicitation [3], the goals of the program are to:
1. Select individuals with the **demonstrated potential** to be **high-achieving** scientists and engineers.
2. **Broaden participation** of the full spectrum of diverse talents in STEM.

### Application Components

The application includes:
- Reference Letters
- Personal Statement
- Research Statement

Ensure you follow all formatting guidelines, as **failure** to do so can lead to **automatic rejection**.

Each statement should address:
- **Intellectual Merit:** This section should highlight your potential as a scientist or engineer, including research experience, academic achievements, and industry experience. It usually has more detail than the broader impacts section.
- **Broader Impacts:** In the research statement, broader impacts should relate to your research. In the personal statement, they should focus on activities outside of your research. Address the societal benefits of your work, such as:
  - Full participation of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in STEM.
  - Improved STEM education and educator development at any level.
  - Increased public scientific literacy and engagement with science and technology.
  - Improved well-being of individuals in society.
  - Development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce.
  - Increased partnerships between academia, industry, and other sectors.
  - Improved national security.
  - Increased economic competitiveness of the United States.
  - Enhanced infrastructure for research and education.

Reference letters should also discuss both intellectual merit and broader impacts.

## Review Rubric

The review rubric for the NSF GRFP includes:

**Intellectual Merit:**  
Rating from 1 (poorly discussed) to 7 (excellent):
- Does the proposed activity advance knowledge within its field or across fields?
- Are the concepts creative, original, or potentially transformative?
- Is the plan well-reasoned, organized, and based on a sound rationale?

**Broader Impact:**  
- Will the activity benefit society or achieve desirable societal outcomes?
- How well do societal outcomes relate to the proposed activity?

**Other Considerations:**
- Are the activities feasible within the time frame?

The rubric comes from the solicitation [3], while the scoring system was explained during an NSF GRFP bootcamp at my university.

## Discussions

Based on past applications found at [Alex Hunter Lang Website](https://www.alexhunterlang.com/nsf-fellowship) [4], successful applicants often have at least one research publication.

Writing my NSF GRFP application took about five months, juggling classes and research. I recommend starting early and refining your statements with feedback from peers. Clarity and reliability are critical.

Feel free to reach out if you have questions via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ahadjawaid), [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ahadjawaid/), or email.

# References

[1] https://www.nsf.gov/edu/GRFPFacts.jsp  
[2] https://www.research.gov/grfp/AwardeeList.do?method=loadAwardeeList  
[3] https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/grfp-nsf-graduate-research-fellowship-program/nsf24-591/solicitation  
[4] https://www.alexhunterlang.com/nsf-fellowship
